Add status quo story about Alan trying to debug an app hang (#106)
rust-lang/wg-async-foundations: src/vision/status_quo/Alan_tries_to_debug_a_hang.md

# 😱 Status quo stories: Alan tries to debug a hang

## 🚧 Warning: Draft status 🚧

This is a draft "status quo" story submitted as part of the brainstorming period. It is derived from real-life experiences of actual Rust users and is meant to reflect some of the challenges that Async Rust programmers face today. 

If you would like to expand on this story, or adjust the answers to the FAQ, feel free to open a PR making edits (but keep in mind that, as they reflect peoples' experiences, status quo stories [cannot be wrong], only inaccurate). Alternatively, you may wish to [add your own status quo story][htvsq]!

## The story

Alan's startup has officially launched and YouBuy is live for the world to use.
The whole team is very excited especially as this will be their first use of Rust in production! 

> Normally, as a .Net shop, they would have written the entire application in C# but because of the scalability and latency requirements on their inventory service, they decided to write that microservice in Rust utilizing the `async` features they've heard so much about. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normally, as a .NET shop, they would have written the entire application in C#, but because of the scalability and latency requirements on their inventory service, they decided to write a microservice in Rust utilizing the `async` features they've heard so much about.
```

The day's excitement soon turns into concern as reports begin coming into support of customers who can't checkout.

> After a few cases, a pattern begins to emerge: when a customer is trying to buy the last available item, the checkout process hangs forever.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a few cases, a pattern begins to emerge: when a customer tries to buy the last available item, the checkout process hangs forever.
```

Alan suspects there is an issue with the lock used in the inventory service to prevent multiple people from buying the last available item at the same time.
With this hunch, he builds the latest code and opens this local dev environment to conduct some tests.
Soon enough, Alan has a repro of the bug.

With the broken environment still running, he decides to use a debugger to see if he can confirm his theory.
In the past, Alan has used Visual Studio's debugger to [diagnose a very similar issue in a C# application he wrote](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/how-do-i-debug-async-code-in-visual-studio/#is-there-a-way-to-better-visualize-tasks-and-async-code-flow).
The debugger was able to show him all the async Tasks currently waiting, their call stacks and what resource they were waiting on.

Alan hasn't used a debugger with Rust before, usually a combination of the strict compiler and a bit of manual testing has been enough to fix all the bugs he's previously encountered.

> He does a quick Google search to see what debugger he should use and decides to go with `gdb` since that's already installed on his system and it sounds like it should work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
He does a quick Google search to see what debugger he should use and decides to go with `gdb` because it is already installed on his system and sounds like it should work.
```

> Alan also pulls up a blog that has a helpful cheatsheet of `gdb` commands since he's not familiar with the debugger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alan also pulls up a blog post that has a helpful cheatsheet of `gdb` commands since he's not familiar with the debugger.
```

Alan restarts the inventory service under `gdb` and gets to work reproducing the issue.

> He reproduces the issue a few times to hopefully make it easier to identify what's going on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
He reproduces the issue a few times in the hope of making it easier to identify the cause of the problem.
```

    at /home/alan/.cargo/registry/src/github.com-1ecc6299db9ec823/tokio-1.4.0/src/runtime/basic_scheduler.rs:145
#19 0x0000555555582094 in tokio::runtime::Runtime::block_on (self=0x7fffffffd2f8, future=...)
    at /home/alan/.cargo/registry/src/github.com-1ecc6299db9ec823/tokio-1.4.0/src/runtime/mod.rs:450
#20 0x000055555557c22f in inventory_service::main () at /home/alan/code/inventory_service/src/main.rs:4
```

</details>

Puzzled, the only line Alan even recognizes is the `main` entry point function for the service.
"Maybe I need to look at another thread?" he thinks and then consults the cheatsheet for the appropriate command.
`info threads` seems promising so he tries that:

<details><summary>(gdb) info threads</summary>

```
(gdb) info threads
  Id   Target Id                                          Frame 
* 1    Thread 0x7ffff7c3b5c0 (LWP 1048) "inventory_servi" 0x00007ffff7d5e58a in epoll_wait (epfd=3, events=0x555555711340, 
    maxevents=1024, timeout=49152) at ../sysdeps/unix/sysv/linux/epoll_wait.c:30
```

</details>

Alan is now even more confused: "Where are my tasks?" he thinks.

> After looking through the cheatsheet and StackOverflow, he discovers there isn't a way to see what async tasks are waiting to be woken up in the debugger.

Author: It might be worth expanding this part of the story a bit. I think Alan would probably know that tasks != threads but he also probably don't have a complete understanding of how exactly they work. He may think that there is one thread that loops through all the tasks and tries to wake them up or something.

Reviewer: Yes, I think this would be helpful. You might also want to clarify whether Alan was using a multi-threaded runtime.

> After looking through the cheatsheet and StackOverflow, he discovers there isn't a way to see what async tasks are waiting to be woken up in the debugger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After looking through the cheatsheet and StackOverflow, he discovers there isn't a way to see which async tasks are waiting to be woken up in the debugger.
```

After thinking a bit, Alan realizes the runtime must have some way of knowing what tasks are waiting to be woken up.
Maybe he can have the service ask the async runtime for that list of tasks every 10 seconds and print them to stdout? 
While crude, this would probably also help him diagnose the hang.
Alan gets to work and opens the runtime docs to figure out how to get that list of tasks.
After spending 30 minutes reading the docs, looking at StackOverflow questions and even posting on users.rust-lang.org, he discovers this simply isn't possible and he will have to add tracing to his application to figure out what's going on.

> Disgruntled, Alan beings the arduous, boring task of instrumenting the application in the hope that the logs will be able to help him. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disgruntled, Alan begins the arduous, boring task of instrumenting the application in the hope that the logs will be able to help him.
```

Taking a shot in the dark, Alan concludes that this thread must be thread which is polling his tasks since it is the only one in the program.
He googles "epoll_wait rust async tasks" but the results aren't very helpful and inspecting the stack frame doesn't yield him any clues as to where his tasks are so this seems to be a dead end.

After thinking a bit, Alan realizes that since the runtime must know what tasks are waiting to be woken up, perhaps he can have the service ask the async runtime for that list of tasks every 10 seconds and print them to stdout? 
While crude, this would probably also help him diagnose the hang.
Alan gets to work and opens the runtime docs to figure out how to get that list of tasks.
After spending 30 minutes reading the docs, looking at StackOverflow questions and even posting on users.rust-lang.org, he discovers this simply isn't possible and he will have to add tracing to his application to figure out what's going on.

Disgruntled, Alan begins the arduous, boring task of instrumenting the application in the hope that the logs will be able to help him.

## 🤔 Frequently Asked Questions

> * **What are the morals of the story?**

Reviewer 2: The style of the FAQ sections was changed in #118 / #119, using sub headings (###) instead of nested bullet lists.
